Context with MCP
Learning Objectives
• Understand the purpose of the Model Context Protocol
(MCP) and how it enables Cursor IDE’s AI to interact
securely with external tools, data sources, and services.
• Learn how MCP enhances contextual awareness,
streamlines workflows, and allows secure data access
within the IDE.
• Gain knowledge of MCP transport methods, including stdio,
SSE, and Streamable HTTP, and when to use each.
• Explore methods for installing and configuring MCP servers
manually, via JSON, or using the MCP Tools Directory.
• Understand authentication and tool management, including
how the Composer Agent interacts with MCP tools and
approval workflows.
Description
The Model Context Protocol (MCP) is an open-source,
standardized framework introduced by Anthropic in
November 2024. It enables large language models (LLMs)
like Cursor's AI to securely interact with external tools,
data sources, and services. MCP facilitates bidirectional
communication, allowing AI assistants to access and
manipulate data in real-time, thereby enhancing their
contextual understanding and capabilities.
Integrating MCP with Cursor IDE oﬀers several
advantages:
• Enhanced Contextual Awareness: By connecting to external
systems, Cursor's AI can access up-to-date information,
documentation, and codebases, leading to more accurate
and relevant suggestions.
• Streamlined Workflows: MCP enables automation of
repetitive tasks, such as code generation, testing, and
deployment, directly from the IDE.
• Secure Data Access: MCP supports secure connections,
ensuring that sensitive data remains protected while being
accessible to the AI assistant.
• Custom Integrations: Developers can create custom MCP
servers to connect Cursor to proprietary systems,
databases, or APIs, tailoring the AI's capabilities to specific
project needs.
How MCP Works
MCP servers expose capabilities through the protocol,
connecting Cursor to external tools or data sources.
Cursor supports three transport methods:
•
stdio: Local execution; Cursor manages a single-user
shell command manually.
•
SSE: Local/Remote execution; deploy as a server for
multiple users with a URL to an SSE endpoint and OAuth
authentication.
•
Streamable HTTP: Local/Remote execution; deploy as
a server for multiple users with a URL to an HTTP endpoint
and OAuth authentication.
Instructions
One-Click Installation
1. Browse the MCP Tools Directory.
2. Select the desired tool.
3. Click "Install" to add it to Cursor.
Manual Installation
1. Open Cursor Settings (Ctrl+Shift+J).
2. Navigate to Tools & Integrations.
3. Click New MCP Server.
4. Configure the server with the necessary details.
Using mcp.json
Configure custom MCP servers with a JSON file:
{
"mcpServers": {
"server-name": {
"command": "npx",
"args": ["-y", "mcp-server"],
"env": {
"API_KEY": "value"
}
}
}
}
This configuration can be placed in your project-
specific .cursor/mcp.json or globally in ~/.cursor/
mcp.json.
Authentication
MCP servers use environment variables for
authentication. Pass API keys and tokens through the
config. Cursor supports OAuth for servers that require it.
Using MCP in Chat
• Automatic Tool Usage: The Composer Agent
automatically uses MCP tools listed under Available
Tools when relevant.
• Manual Tool Invocation: Ask for a specific tool by name
or describe what you need.
• Tool Management: Enable or disable tools from
settings. Disabled tools won’t be loaded into context or
available to the Agent.
Tool Approval
By default, the Agent asks for approval before using MCP
tools. Click the arrow next to the tool name to see
arguments.
References
https://docs.cursor.com/en/tools/mcp https://docs.cursor.com/
en/context/mcp